hey my name is Mike I'm a developer from
Philadelphia and in this video I'm going
to give you an introduction into
object-oriented programming by answering
the question what are classes and
objects so without further ado let's get
into it and we'll learn about these two
really important concepts one of the
best things about writing programs is
being able to easily work with and keep
track of different types of data in fact
data is the driving force behind most
programs that you'll write the
programmers are constantly parsing
strings adding and subtracting numbers
counting things in passing different
pieces of data around and all major
applications being able to work with
data in an organized and structured way
is extremely important now by default
most programming languages will allow
you to store and keep track of three
distinct types of data text numbers and
boolean values with these three data
types we can represent all different
types of information things like
people's names with text whether or not
someone is an organ donor with a boolean
value or the price of an item with a
number and being able to keep track of
simple pieces of data like this is
really great but what happens when we
need to work with more complex data we
can represent a name with a string and a
price with a number but what if we want
to represent something more complex like
an entity in the real world let's take a
student for example imagine we were
writing a program for a school and we
wanted to keep track of the students who
are currently enrolled so now instead of
keeping track of names with strings or
prices with numbers we want to be able
to keep track of students but the
problem is we don't have a datatype for
students there's no student data type
floating around that's built into the
language like strings numbers or boolean
x' on top of that we might also want to
define some functionality around the
student like giving school
administrators the ability to mark a
student as absent or change their grades
for example and as we write more and
more complex programs like the one for
this school we'll want to be able to
keep track of and model more complex
pieces of data and therefore we need
more complex data types in order to
solve this problem we can use an
object-oriented programming language an
object-oriented programming language is
a programming language which allows
developers to create their own custom
data types so even if the language
doesn't provide a student data type by
default a developer could create the
student data type and then
use it just like they would a normal
string number or boolean value so if we
use an object or in a programming
language to write our school program we
can easily keep track of all of the
students by creating a custom student
data type so how exactly does this work
how can we go about creating our student
data type and start creating students in
our program the first step is to create
a student class in object-oriented
programming a class is a specification
of the new data type it's essentially a
blueprint that tells the programming
language what the new data type looks
like and what it's made up of in our
student class we can define the
attributes and the functionality that
make up a student by creating a student
class the attributes of a class are
individual strings numbers or boolean z'
which define the attributes of the
entity we're modeling in this case a
student might have a name attribute
which would be a string a GPA attribute
which would be a number a year attribute
for freshman sophomore junior senior
that might also be a string and then
maybe it has scholarship boolean which
would determine whether or not the
student has a scholarship so you can see
we can define all these different
attributes of a student which themselves
would be either strings numbers or
boolean z' in addition to attributes we
can also define functionality around the
student so for example we might create a
has honors function inside of the
student class which would use the GPA of
the student to determine if they qualify
for honors so maybe if the student has a
GPA of greater than 3.5 then we would
say they have honors a week you create a
give scholarship function which would
set the has scholarship boolean to true
thus giving the student a scholarship
and so the class can have these
attributes and these functions which
will essentially make up the data type
and allow us to define what a student
looks like in our program when we create
a class we tell the language what this
new data type looks like and what it
does but all we're doing here is
describing the data type we're not
actually creating a student that we can
work with to create a student in our
program we'll need an object an object
is an instance of a class which means a
student object would be an instance of
our student class so a student object is
an actual student with an
actual name GPA year and scholarship
status so in our program we might create
three student objects with names Jack
Kate and Sawyer and each of them would
be an instance of our student class now
the object is the actual thing that
we're gonna work with in our programs
you could pass it around you can store
it inside of a variable you could access
each one of those attributes or call any
of those functions the object is the
implementation of the class the class is
just simply the blueprint it defines
what the new data type looks like now
the cool thing about classes and objects
is that once we define what the data
type looks like in the class we can
create as many objects or instances of
that class as we want so our program can
keep track of thousands of student
objects all with their own name GPA year
etc now our code could also use the
functions exposed by each of these
student objects to for example give them
scholarships or figure out if they have
honors so if some other piece of code
was responsible for granting
scholarships to students it could use
the give scholarship function for a
particular student in order to do that
so object-oriented programming is really
great because it allows us to model real
world entities like students in our
programs so we can create a student
class and then create instances of that
student class student objects and use
them now you could do the same thing
with other entities in the real world it
doesn't just have to be students you
could model a light bulb you could model
a microphone you can model an animal or
a day of the week you can model anything
that you can think of an object-oriented
programming is great because it allows
you to be flexible enough to model just
about anything in the real world so
that's a little bit about
object-oriented programming it's an
extremely popular way to write programs
and most of the modern programming
languages support it thanks for watching
I hope you enjoyed the video and you
learn something new and I'll see you
next time